Audit logging (#440)
City-of-Helsinki/kukkuu: hel_django_auditlog_extra/README.md

  - [Utilities](#utilities)
    - [`AuditLogConfigurationHelper`](#auditlogconfigurationhelper)
      - [Initialization examples for `AuditLogConfigurationHelper`:](#initialization-examples-for-auditlogconfigurationhelper)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Context

### Django Auditlog

> PyPi: https://pypi.org/project/django-auditlog/.
>
> Github: https://github.com/jazzband/django-auditlog.
>
> Docs: https://django-auditlog.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html.

The `Django-auditlog` is a reusable app for Django that makes logging changes to your models a breeze. It provides a simple and efficient way to track who made changes to your data and when. This is crucial for accountability, debugging, and compliance with regulations like GDPR.

> NOTE: The `django-auditlog` is supported by the **Platta structured log transfer utility** (https://github.com/City-of-Helsinki/structured-log-transfer).

Here's a breakdown of what it offers:

- **Automatic Change Logging**: It automatically logs changes to your Django models, including creation, updates, and deletion. You can easily track who made the changes and what those changes were.

> - **Customization**: You can customize which fields to track, the logging level (e.g., only log changes to specific fields), and even use signals to trigger actions based on logged events.

Reviewer: > You can customize which fields to track, the logging level (e.g., only log changes to specific fields)

Redundancy as the field selection is twice here, or did you mean something else?

- **Security and Compliance**: Track user actions to meet regulatory requirements and identify potentially malicious activity.

- **Data Analysis**: Gain insights into how your data is being used and modified over time.

- **Accountability**: Ensure that users are held accountable for their actions within your application.

If you're building a Django application where tracking data changes is important, django-auditlog is a valuable tool to consider.

### Django Graphene

> PyPi: https://pypi.org/project/graphene-django/.
>
> Github: https://github.com/graphql-python/graphene-django.
>
> Docs: https://docs.graphene-python.org/projects/django/en/latest/.

Django Graphene is a library that integrates the Django web framework with Graphene, a Python library for building GraphQL APIs. It allows you to easily create GraphQL APIs in your Django projects, leveraging the power and flexibility of GraphQL while maintaining the simplicity and structure of Django.

### Django Rest Framework

> PyPi: https://pypi.org/project/djangorestframework/.
>
> Github: https://github.com/encode/django-rest-framework.
>
> Docs: https://www.django-rest-framework.org/.

> Django REST framework is a powerful and flexible toolkit that makes it easier to build Web APIs using the Django framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Django REST framework is a powerful and flexible toolkit that makes it easier to build Web REST APIs using the Django framework.
```

## FAQ

> There have been some incompatibility issues with `django-auditlog` and `django-graphene`. Some solutions to that and answers to some other common questions, issues and more details, see the [FAQ.md](./docs/FAQ.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There have been some incompatibility issues with `django-auditlog` and `django-graphene`. Some solutions to them and answers to common questions and issues, see the [FAQ.md](./docs/FAQ.md).
```
Simplifying the latter sentence a bit to be more readable.

## Installation

> **Dependencies (TODO):**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Dependencies:**
```
unless the TODO is still applicable.

For actor handling, django-auditlog and test usage:

- **`django.contrib.auth`**: Django built-in
- **`django.contrib.contenttypes`**: Django built-in
- **`auditlog`**: django-auditlog

**`settings.py`**:

```python
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    "django.contrib.auth",
    "django.contrib.contenttypes",
    "auditlog",
    # ...
    "hel_django_auditlog_extra.apps.HelDjangoAuditLogExtraConfig",
```

## Features

### Context manager

Code reference: [context.py](./context.py).

#### `set_request_path`

    Store the request path in the LogEntry's `additional_data` field.

    This context manager uses a ContextVar to store the request path and
    connects a signal receiver to automatically add it to LogEntry instances.

>     It uses a unique signal_duid to prevent duplicate signals when nested.

Author: I won't rename it since it is the original name of it also in django-auditlog

>     It uses a unique signal_duid to prevent duplicate signals when nested.

Reviewer: Ah, that wasn't apparent from the code checkout when searching it locally, so the signal coming from django-auditlog could be documented. Does django-auditlog document the signal?

    address a potential issue where the actor (user and their IP address)
    might not be available when `auditlog` attempts to access it.

    It achieves this by explicitly setting the actor in the
    audit log context before the request is processed. This ensures that
    audit logs accurately reflect the user responsible for each action.

    This fix is based on the suggestion provided in:
    https://github.com/jazzband/django-auditlog/issues/115#issuecomment-1682234986

    Additionally, this middleware sets the request path in the audit log
    context, providing more context for each logged action.

To use, add `"hel_django_auditlog_extra.middleware.AuditlogMiddleware"` to the list of the middlewares in `settings.py`, (instead of the one that `django-auditlog` offers):

```python
MIDDLEWARE = [
    "django.middleware.security.SecurityMiddleware",
    "django.contrib.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware",
    # ...other middlewares that manipulates request context...
    "hel_django_auditlog_extra.middleware.AuditlogMiddleware",
]
```

### Graphene Decorators

Code reference: [graphene_decorators.py](./graphene_decorators.py).

#### `auditlog_access`

>     Decorator to init audit logging to a Graphene DjangoObjectType's get_node method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Decorator to add audit logging to a Graphene DjangoObjectType's get_node method.
```
At least for me "add audit logging" is more clear here than "init audit logging". How do you see this?

        except cls._meta.model.DoesNotExist:
            return None
```

### Mixins

Code reference: [mixins.py](./mixins.py).

#### `AuditlogAdminViewAccessLogMixin`

    A mixin for Django Admin views to log access events using `django-auditlog`.

    This mixin automatically logs accesses to the `change_view`, `history_view`,
    and `delete_view` in the Django Admin. It also provides an option to log
    accesses to the `changelist_view` (list view).

    By default, only access to individual object views (change, history, delete)
    is logged. To enable logging for the list view, set the
    `write_accessed_from_list_view` attribute to `True` in your `ModelAdmin`.
    Please note that this will trigger a very intensive logging and a lots of
    access log data will be created and stored!

    Attributes:
    write_accessed_from_list_view (bool):
    A flag to enable/disable logging access from the list view.
    Defaults to `False`.

Example:

```python
from django.contrib import admin
from .models import MyModel

@admin.register(MyModel)
class MyModelAdmin(AuditlogAdminViewAccessLogMixin, admin.ModelAdmin):

>     write_accessed_from_list_view = True  # Enable list view logging

Reviewer: Would `enable_list_view_logging` (i.e. the comment as a variable name) be better than `write_accessed_from_list_view`? IMHO it is very clear (pro), as a con it doesn't have anything specific to do with access vs. create/update/delete. How do you see this?

  ]
  ```

- Another way to achieve this would be using a `post_migrate` signal receiver, which is called after the migration process (`python manage.py migrate`) is done:

  **`signals.py`**:

  ```python
  from django.apps import apps
  from django.db.models.signals import post_migrate
  from django.dispatch import receiver

  from hel_django_auditlog_extra.utils import AuditLogConfigurationHelper

  @receiver(post_migrate)
  def check_audit_log_configuration(sender, **kwargs):
      """
      Signal receiver to check audit log configuration after all apps are migrated.
      """
      if apps.ready:
          AuditLogConfigurationHelper.raise_error_if_unconfigured_models()
  ```

  Remember that signals and receivers needs to be connected (for example in `apps.py`):

  ```python
  from django.apps import AppConfig
  from django.core.signals import request_finished

  class MyAppConfig(AppConfig):
      ...

      def ready(self):
          # Implicitly connect signal handlers decorated with @receiver.
          from . import signals

          # Explicitly connect a signal handler.
          request_finished.connect(signals.my_callback)

>   ```

Reviewer: Is this needed? Looking at the https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/topics/signals/#listening-to-signals it does mention this as the "manual connect route" but then using the `receiver` decorator as an alternative for this. And the `receiver` decorator is documented already above.

If you feel this is needed then it could be made clear that this is an alternative to using the `receiver` decorator for connecting signals to receivers.

Author: `from . import signals` is still needed, so the receiver decorator is read. If the decorator is not used, then also the `connect` needs to be called for the signal. Or did you mean something else?

Reviewer: I was just reading the README and thought the train-of-thought was a bit off, that's what I meant by my comment. So, basically IMHO how this whole section with how the signals can be connected (using the decorator and not) reads as a whole could use some tuning. As a whole especially, that's my point, not just as separate paragraphs.

>   Reference: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/topics/signals/#listening-to-signals.

Reviewer: Is this needed? Looking at the https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/topics/signals/#listening-to-signals it does mention this as the "manual connect route" but then using the `receiver` decorator as an alternative for this. And the `receiver` decorator is documented already above.

If you feel this is needed then it could be made clear that this is an alternative to using the `receiver` decorator for connecting signals to receivers.

  ```

  **`settings.py`**:

  ```python
  INSTALLED_APPS = [
      "django.contrib.auth",
      "django.contrib.contenttypes",
      "django.contrib.sessions",
      "django.contrib.messages",
      "django.contrib.staticfiles",
      "auditlog",
      # local apps
      "events",
      "hel_django_auditlog_extra.apps.HelDjangoAuditLogExtraConfig",
      "mainproject",
      "django_cleanup.apps.CleanupConfig",  # This must be included last
  ]
  ```

- Another way to achieve this would be using a `post_migrate` signal receiver, which is called after the migration process (`python manage.py migrate`) is done:

  **`signals.py`**:

  ```python
  from django.apps import apps
  from django.db.models.signals import post_migrate
  from django.dispatch import receiver

  from hel_django_auditlog_extra.utils import AuditLogConfigurationHelper

  @receiver(post_migrate)
  def check_audit_log_configuration(sender, **kwargs):
      """
      Signal receiver to check audit log configuration after all apps are migrated.
      """
      if apps.ready:
          AuditLogConfigurationHelper.raise_error_if_unconfigured_models()
  ```

>   Remember that signals and receivers needs to be connected (for example in `apps.py`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can also connect signals and receivers manually instead of using `@receiver` (for example in `apps.py`):
```
to make the flow of text / readability slightly better.
